docs: add proposal for Python SDK Common Components (#11765)
kubeflow/pipelines: proposals/11765-KFP-SDK-common-component-support/11765-KFP-SDK-common-component-support.md

The current KFP component resources suffer from several issues:

* **Disorganized and Inconsistent [`pipelines/components`](../../components) Directory:** The existing directory structure is vendor-centric, making it difficult to discover components based on functionality. Components within this directory are often POC-level, outdated, and lack consistent quality, documentation, and usability. MLEs prefer to work with Python; however, many components in the [`pipelines/components`](../../components) directory rely on YAML or containerized components only, and they have little or no documentation.
* **Lack of Python SDK-Level Support for components:**  The KFP SDK currently focuses on component *creation* and *loading* but lacks a built-in support with readily available, high-quality components. This forces users to either build components from scratch, or go to the repo and navigate the fragmented [`pipelines/components`](../../components) directory.

These issues lead to inefficiencies, increased development time, and a less-than-ideal user experience; they ultimately get in the way of wider adoption and effective use of KFP for ML workflows.

> ## Proposal: SDK Support for Common Components

Reviewer: I personally prefer the Ansible Galaxy approach where we keep an index of supported components that are packaged in separate Python packages. This gives the maintainer more control such as when to release, when to update base image references, and CI. For CI, I imagine that many components may require specific infrastructure to test such as cloud resources for a component that integrates with a popular cloud vendor.

Author: The Ansible Galaxy approach seems similar to what ML likes to call a "hub". (Tensorflow Hub, PyTorch Hub, Huggingface Hub). I like this idea too, and I mention it as a follow-up proposal idea below. I purposefully kept it out of scope for this proposal, because I believe it to be a larger undertaking and a separate project. (perhaps I need more details on scope in this proposal?).

The scope of this proposal is a built-in core set of components that would likely be kept small--for example, Kubeflow-related components or basic ML only. This is also in-line with other ML tools (for example, pytorch has builtin models that you can import, and then also a hub). 

I believe this limited buit-in set of components is needed for KFP to be a serious ML application. ["An ecosystem of existing components" is also promised by the product](https://www.kubeflow.org/docs/components/pipelines/overview/), so it's something this repo should have a direct investment in, at least at the basic core level.

Reviewer: I think we could start small and just have a GitHub readme with links to community components rather than build a full "hub" experience.

Author: I added some comments supporting the idea of a separate community repository.

        * `split_dataset(...)`: Split a dataset into training and validation sets.
        * `validate_schema(...)`: Validate data against a schema.

    * **`kfp.components.train`:** Components for model training and hyperparameter tuning.  Conceptual examples:
        * **`kubeflow_trainer(...)`:**  Integration with Kubeflow Training Operators
        * **`hyperparameter_tune(...)`:**  Integration with Katib for hyperparameter optimization.
        * `xgboost.train(...)`:  Component for XGBoost training.

    * **`kfp.components.serve`:** Components for model deployment and serving. Conceptual examples:
        * **`deploy_kserve(...)`:** Integrate with KServe for model serving on Kubernetes.
        * `register_model(...)`:  Register a model in a model registry.

    * **`kfp.components.validate`:** Components for model evaluation and monitoring. Conceptual examples:
        * `evaluate_classification_model(...)`:  Calculate standard evaluation metrics.
        * `data_drift_detection(...)`: Detect data drift using statistical methods.

Note that the conceptual examples here are for illustrative purposes, and are not meant to be the final say.

> * **Implementation Details:**

Reviewer: Similar to my comments in #11766, we need clear owners and guidelines around CVE remediation.

    * **Python-Centric Design:** Components will be primarily Python function-based, leveraging the `@kfp.dsl.component` decorator for ease of use and local testing.
    * **Base Image Utilization:** Each Python SDK component will have an acceptible default publicly available base image (for example [pytorch/pytorch](https://hub.docker.com/r/pytorch/pytorch)).

>     * **Python Dependencies** Python dependencies not in the base image will be the default list in the `packages_to_install` parameter.

Author: Putting packages in `packages_to_install` vs. in the base image is a tradeoff, but it is a well-established Kubeflow norm (one that is also followed by Vertex AI Pipelines [see here](https://github.com/GoogleCloudPlatform/vertex-ai-samples/tree/main/notebooks/official/pipelines)).

The usability side of this is that ML engineers can use general base images instead of maintaining specific custom images with everything baked in. 

The proposal just follows the norm already set by KFP.

    * **Clear Documentation:** Each SDK component will have comprehensive documentation, including:
        * Purpose and functionality
        * Input and output specifications
        * Dependency requirements (packages, environment variables, cluster CRDs, Secrets etc.)
        * Usage examples
        * Guidance on base image selection and other parameter options.

>     * **Focus on Core Kubeflow Integrations:** Prioritize components that integrate seamlessly with core Kubeflow projects like Kubeflow Trainer, Katib, and KServe.

Reviewer: This seems to conflict with the [Kubeflow SDK](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1rX7ELAHRb_lvh0Y7BK1HBYAbA0zi9enB0F_358ZC58w/edit) proposal. Could you please comment here @franciscojavierarceo?

Author: We definitely need coordination, as the KFP SDK will likely be integrated with the Kubeflow SDK in the future. I understand the KFP SDK as an umbrella above, making it easy to interact with all of the Kubeflow tools--a namespace above (kf.kfp..., kf.trainer..., kf.optimize...).

Since a pipeline is meant to string tasks together, it makes sense to have components in KFP that call functionality from other Kubeflow tools.

* **Lack of Python SDK-Level Support for components:**  The KFP SDK currently focuses on component *creation* and *loading* but lacks a built-in support with readily available, high-quality components. This forces users to either build components from scratch, or go to the repo and navigate the fragmented [`pipelines/components`](../../components) directory.

These issues lead to inefficiencies, increased development time, and a less-than-ideal user experience; they ultimately get in the way of wider adoption and effective use of KFP for ML workflows.

## Proposal: SDK Support for Common Components

This proposal advocates for a fundamental shift in how KFP provides common component support: **integration directly into the KFP SDK.**  This involves:

* **Deprecate and Replacing the [`pipelines/components`](../../components) Directory:**

>     * **Retire Outdated/POC Components:**  Identify and remove components in [`pipelines/components`](../../components) that are outdated, buggy, or lack sufficient quality.

Author: I want to be careful not to solution to much, since this is a proposal. The low hanging fruit is components with incomplete functionality (like the IBM folder with a README only), components that haven't been updated from V1 (of course we can consider updating as well), and component that just don't run due to other code issues.

>     * **Migrate Useful Examples:**  Some components appear to be meant more as proof-of-concepts, than as production-ready tools; these are better kept in the [`samples`](../../samples/) directory. Relocate valuable, proof-of-concept components to the [`samples`](../../samples/) directory as illustrative examples.

Author: One of the big problems is there are no standards, so component dev started all over the place, and then of course stalled. The companion proposal on expectations and standards should help address this question.
https://github.com/kubeflow/pipelines/pull/11766

>     * **Migrate Useful Examples:**  Some components appear to be meant more as proof-of-concepts, than as production-ready tools; these are better kept in the [`samples`](../../samples/) directory. Relocate valuable, proof-of-concept components to the [`samples`](../../samples/) directory as illustrative examples.

Author: I separated the proposals because they hold value independently. But they also complement each other quite well.

        * **`kubeflow_trainer(...)`:**  Integration with Kubeflow Training Operators
        * **`hyperparameter_tune(...)`:**  Integration with Katib for hyperparameter optimization.
        * `xgboost.train(...)`:  Component for XGBoost training.

    * **`kfp.components.serve`:** Components for model deployment and serving. Conceptual examples:
        * **`deploy_kserve(...)`:** Integrate with KServe for model serving on Kubernetes.
        * `register_model(...)`:  Register a model in a model registry.

    * **`kfp.components.validate`:** Components for model evaluation and monitoring. Conceptual examples:
        * `evaluate_classification_model(...)`:  Calculate standard evaluation metrics.
        * `data_drift_detection(...)`: Detect data drift using statistical methods.

Note that the conceptual examples here are for illustrative purposes, and are not meant to be the final say.

* **Implementation Details:**

    * **Python-Centric Design:** Components will be primarily Python function-based, leveraging the `@kfp.dsl.component` decorator for ease of use and local testing.

>     * **Base Image Utilization:** Each Python SDK component will have an acceptible default publicly available base image (for example [pytorch/pytorch](https://hub.docker.com/r/pytorch/pytorch)).

Reviewer 2: Might I recommend we push for images in ghcr/gcr/quay instead? (any place without an image pull policy)

Author: As far as this proposal goes, the important thing is that the default base image is ready to use (so we can count on it being in a public registry somewhere, and not just a Dockerfile). This default can of course be overridden by the user when they call the component function.

    * **Python Dependencies** Python dependencies not in the base image will be the default list in the `packages_to_install` parameter.
    * **Clear Documentation:** Each SDK component will have comprehensive documentation, including:
        * Purpose and functionality
        * Input and output specifications
        * Dependency requirements (packages, environment variables, cluster CRDs, Secrets etc.)
        * Usage examples
        * Guidance on base image selection and other parameter options.

>     * **Focus on Core Kubeflow Integrations:** Prioritize components that integrate seamlessly with core Kubeflow projects like Kubeflow Training Operators, Katib, and KServe.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * **Focus on Core Kubeflow Integrations:** Prioritize components that integrate seamlessly with core Kubeflow projects like Kubeflow Trainer, Katib, and KServe.
```

>     * **Focus on User Value and Simple Design** Components that make it into the Python SDK should be there because they are widely useful in MLE work. Simplicity is a virtue. Since each new component brings complexity to the SDK, it must also bring a higher level of value. It may be possible to include more narrow use case components in library extensions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * **Focus on User Value and Simple Design** Components that make it into the Python SDK should be there because they are widely useful in MLE work. Simplicity is a virtue. Since each new component brings complexity to the SDK, it must also bring a high level of value. It may be possible to include more narrow use case components in library extensions.
```
